Spectral Representations for

Convolutional Neural Networks

Department of Mathematics

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Oren Rippel

rippel@math.mit.edu

Jasper Snoek

Twitter and Harvard SEAS

jsnoek@seas.harvard.edu

Ryan P. Adams

Twitter and Harvard SEAS
rpa@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract

Discrete Fourier transforms provide a signiﬁcant speedup in the computation of
convolutions in deep learning. In this work, we demonstrate that, beyond its ad-
vantages for efﬁcient computation, the spectral domain also provides a powerful
representation in which to model and train convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
We employ spectral representations to introduce a number of innovations to CNN
design. First, we propose spectral pooling, which performs dimensionality re-
duction by truncating the representation in the frequency domain. This approach
preserves considerably more information per parameter than other pooling strate-
gies and enables ﬂexibility in the choice of pooling output dimensionality. This
representation also enables a new form of stochastic regularization by random-
ized modiﬁcation of resolution. We show that these methods achieve competitive
results on classiﬁcation and approximation tasks, without using any dropout or
max-pooling.
Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of complex-coefﬁcient spectral param-
eterization of convolutional ﬁlters. While this leaves the underlying model un-
changed, it results in a representation that greatly facilitates optimization. We
observe on a variety of popular CNN conﬁgurations that this leads to signiﬁcantly
faster convergence during training.

Introduction

1
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1989) have been used to achieve unparal-
leled results across a variety of benchmark machine learning problems, and have been applied
successfully throughout science and industry for tasks such as large scale image and video clas-
siﬁcation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Karpathy et al., 2014). One of the primary challenges of CNNs,
however, is the computational expense necessary to train them. In particular, the efﬁcient implemen-
tation of convolutional kernels has been a key ingredient of any successful use of CNNs at scale.
Due to its efﬁciency and the potential for amortization of cost, the discrete Fourier transform has long
been considered by the deep learning community to be a natural approach to fast convolution (Ben-
gio & LeCun, 2007). More recently, Mathieu et al. (2013); Vasilache et al. (2014) have demonstrated
that convolution can be computed signiﬁcantly faster using discrete Fourier transforms than directly
in the spatial domain, even for tiny ﬁlters. This computational gain arises from the convenient prop-
erty of operator duality between convolution in the spatial domain and element-wise multiplication
in the frequency domain.
In this work, we argue that the frequency domain offers more than a computational trick for con-
volution: it also provides a powerful representation for modeling and training CNNs. Frequency
decomposition allows studying an input across its various length-scales of variation, and as such
provides a natural framework for the analysis of data with spatial coherence. We introduce two

1

applications of spectral representations. These contributions can be applied independently of each
other.
Spectral parametrization We propose the idea of learning the ﬁlters of CNNs directly in the
frequency domain. Namely, we parametrize them as maps of complex numbers, whose discrete
Fourier transforms correspond to the usual ﬁlter representations in the spatial domain.
Because this mapping corresponds to unitary transformations of the ﬁlters, this reparametrization
does not alter the underlying model. However, we argue that the spectral representation provides an
appropriate domain for parameter optimization, as the frequency basis captures typical ﬁlter struc-
ture well. More speciﬁcally, we show that ﬁlters tend to be considerably sparser in their spectral rep-
resentations, thereby reducing the redundancy that appears in spatial domain representations. This
provides the optimizer with more meaningful axis-aligned directions that can be taken advantage of
with standard element-wise preconditioning.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of this reparametrization on a number of CNN optimization tasks,
converging 2-5 times faster than the standard spatial representation.
Spectral pooling Pooling refers to dimensionality reduction used in CNNs to impose a capacity
bottleneck and facilitate computation. We introduce a new approach to pooling we refer to as spec-
tral pooling. It performs dimensionality reduction by projecting onto the frequency basis set and
then truncating the representation.
This approach alleviates a number of issues present in existing pooling strategies. For example,
while max pooling is featured in almost every CNN and has had great empirical success, one major
criticism has been its poor preservation of information (Hinton, 2014b,a). This weakness is exhib-
ited in two ways. First, along with other stride-based pooling approaches, it implies a very sharp
dimensionality reduction by at least a factor of 4 every time it is applied on two-dimensional inputs.
Moreover, while it encourages translational invariance, it does not utilize its capacity well to reduce
approximation loss: the maximum value in each window only reﬂects very local information, and
often does not represent well the contents of the window.
In contrast, we show that spectral pooling preserves considerably more information for the same
number of parameters. It achieves this by exploiting the non-uniformity of typical inputs in their
signal-to-noise ratio as a function of frequency. For example, natural images are known to have an
expected power spectrum that follows an inverse power law: power is heavily concentrated in the
lower frequencies — while higher frequencies tend to encode noise (Torralba & Oliva, 2003). As
such, the elimination of higher frequencies in spectral pooling not only does minimal damage to the
information in the input, but can even be viewed as a type of denoising.
In addition, spectral pooling allows us to specify any arbitrary output map dimensionality. This per-
mits reduction of the map dimensionality in a slow and controlled manner as a function of network
depth. Also, since truncation of the frequency representation exactly corresponds to reduction in
resolution, we can supplement spectral pooling with stochastic regularization in the form of ran-
domized resolution.
Spectral pooling can be implemented at a negligible additional computational cost in convolutional
neural networks that employ FFT for convolution kernels, as it only requires matrix truncation. We
also note that these two ideas are both compatible with the recently-introduced method of batch
normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), permitting even better training efﬁciency.
2 The Discrete Fourier Transform
The discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is a powerful way to decompose a spatiotemporal signal. In
this section, we provide an introduction to a number of components of the DFT drawn upon in
this work. We conﬁne ourselves to the two-dimensional DFT, although all properties and results
presented can be easily extended to other input dimensions.
Given an input x ∈ CM×N (we address the constraint of real inputs in Subsection 2.1), its 2D
DFT F (x) ∈ CM×N is given by
N−1(cid:88)
F (x)hw =

xmne−2πi( mh

M−1(cid:88)

M + nw
N )

1

√M N

m=0

n=0

∀h ∈ {0, . . . , M − 1},∀w ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1} .

The DFT is linear and unitary, and so its inverse transform is given by F −1(·) = F (·)∗, namely the
conjugate of the transform itself.

2

(a) DFT basis functions.

(b) Examples of input-transform pairs.

(c) Conjugate Symm.

Figure 1: Properties of discrete Fourier transforms. (a) All discrete Fourier basis functions of map
size 8 × 8. Note the equivalence of some of these due to conjugate symmetry. (b) Examples of
input images and their frequency representations, presented as log-amplitudes. The frequency maps
have been shifted to center the DC component. Rays in the frequency domain correspond to spatial
domain edges aligned perpendicular to these. (c) Conjugate symmetry patterns for inputs with odd
(top) and even (bottom) dimensionalities. Orange: real-valuedness constraint. Blue: no constraint.
Gray: value ﬁxed by conjugate symmetry.

Intuitively, the DFT coefﬁcients resulting from projections onto the different frequencies can be
thought of as measures of correlation of the input with basis functions of various length-scales. See
Figure 1(a) for a visualization of the DFT basis functions, and Figure 1(b) for examples of input-
frequency map pairs.
The widespread deployment of the DFT can be partially attributed to the development of the
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), a mainstay of signal processing and a standard component of
most math libraries. The FFT is an efﬁcient implementation of the DFT with time complex-
ity O (M N log (M N )).
Convolution using DFT One powerful property of frequency analysis is the operator duality be-
tween convolution in the spatial domain and element-wise multiplication in the spectral domain.
Namely, given two inputs x, f ∈ RM×N , we may write
where by ∗ we denote a convolution and by (cid:12) an element-wise product.
Approximation error The unitarity of the Fourier basis makes it convenient for the analysis of
approximation loss. More speciﬁcally, Parseval’s Theorem links the (cid:96)2 loss between any input x and
its approximation ˆx to the corresponding loss in the frequency domain:

F (x ∗ f ) = F (x) (cid:12) F (f )

(1)

(cid:107)x − ˆx(cid:107)2

2 = (cid:107)F (x) − F (ˆx)(cid:107)2
2 .

(2)
An equivalent statement also holds for the inverse DFT operator. This allows us to quickly assess
how an input is affected by any distortion we might make to its frequency representation.
2.1 Conjugate symmetry constraints
In the following sections of the paper, we will propagate signals and their gradients through DFT
and inverse DFT layers. In these layers, we will represent the frequency domain in the complex
ﬁeld. However, for all layers apart from these, we would like to ensure that both the signal and its
gradient are constrained to the reals. A necessary and sufﬁcient condition to achieve this is conjugate
symmetry in the frequency domain. Namely, for any transform y = F (x) of some input x, it must
hold that

ymn = y∗

(M−m) modM,(N−n) modN

∀m ∈ {0, . . . , M − 1},∀n ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1} .

(3)
Thus, intuitively, given the left half of our frequency map, the diminished number of degrees of
freedom allows us to reconstruct the right. In effect, this allows us to store approximately half the
parameters that would otherwise be necessary. Note, however, that this does not reduce the effec-
tive dimensionality, since each element consists of real and imaginary components. The conjugate
symmetry constraints are visualized in Figure 1(c). Given a real input, its DFT will necessarily meet
these. This symmetry can be observed in the frequency representations of the examples in Figure
1(b). However, since we seek to optimize over parameters embedded directly in the frequency do-
main, we need to pay close attention to ensure the conjugate symmetry constraints are enforced upon
inversion back to the spatial domain (see Subsection 2.2).

3

2.2 Differentiation
Here we discuss how to propagate the gradient through a Fourier transform layer. This analysis can
be similarly applied to the inverse DFT layer. Deﬁne x ∈ RM×N and y = F (x) to be the input and
output of a DFT layer respectively, and R : RM×N → R a real-valued loss function applied to y
which can be considered as the remainder of the forward pass. Since the DFT is a linear operator,
its gradient is simply the transformation matrix itself. During back-propagation, then, this gradient
is conjugated, and this, by DFT unitarity, corresponds to the application of the inverse transform:

(cid:18) ∂R

(cid:19)

.

(4)

= F −1

∂R
∂x

∂y

2

2 , N

, y N

2 ,0, y0, N

There is an intricacy that makes matters a bit more complicated. Namely, the conjugate symmetry
condition discussed in Subsection 2.1 introduces redundancy.
Inspecting the conjugate symme-
try constraints in Equation (3), we note their enforcement of the special case y00 ∈ R for N odd,
2 ∈ R for N even. For all other indices they enforce conjugate equality
and y00, y N
of pairs of distinct elements. These conditions imply that the number of unconstrained parameters
is about half the map in its entirety.
3 Spectral Pooling
The choice of a pooling technique boils down to the selection of an appropriate set of basis func-
tions to project onto, and some truncation of this representation to establish a lower-dimensionality
approximation to the original input. The idea behind spectral pooling stems from the observation
that the frequency domain provides an ideal basis for inputs with spatial structure. We ﬁrst discuss
the technical details of this approach, and then its advantages.
Spectral pooling is straightforward to understand and to implement. We assume we are given an
input x ∈ RM×N , and some desired output map dimensionality H × W . First, we compute the dis-
crete Fourier transform of the input into the frequency domain as y = F (x) ∈ CM×N , and assume
that the DC component has been shifted to the center of the domain as is standard practice. We
then crop the frequency representation by maintaining only the central H × W submatrix of fre-
quencies, which we denote as ˆy ∈ CH×W . Finally, we map this approximation back into the spatial
domain by taking its inverse DFT as ˆx = F −1(ˆy) ∈ RH×W . These steps are listed in Algorithm
1. Note that some of the conjugate symmetry special cases described in Subsection 2.2 might be
broken by this truncation. As such, to ensure that ˆx is real-valued, we must treat these individually
with TREATCORNERCASES, which can be found in the supplementary material.
Figure 2 demonstrates the effect of this pooling for various choices of H × W . The back-
propagation procedure is quite intuitive, and can be found in Algorithm 2 (REMOVEREDUNDANCY
and RECOVERMAP can be found in the supplementary material). In Subsection 2.2, we addressed
the nuances of differentiating through DFT and inverse DFT layers. Apart from these, the last com-
ponent left undiscussed is differentiation through the truncation of the frequency matrix, but this
corresponds to a simple zero-padding of the gradient maps to the appropriate dimensions.
In practice, the DFTs are the computational bottlenecks of spectral pooling. However, we note that in
convolutional neural networks that employ FFTs for convolution computation, spectral pooling can
be implemented at a negligible additional computational cost, since the DFT is performed regardless.
We proceed to discuss a number of properties of spectral pooling, which we then test comprehen-
sively in Section 5.

Algorithm 1: Spectral pooling

Input: Map x ∈ RM×N , output size H×W
Output: Pooled map ˆx ∈ RH×W
1: y ← F (x)
2: ˆy ← CROPSPECTRUM(y, H × W )
3: ˆy ← TREATCORNERCASES(ˆy)
4: ˆx ← F −1(ˆy)

(cid:1)

1: ˆz ← F(cid:0) ∂R

Algorithm 2: Spectral pooling back-propagation
Input: Gradient w.r.t output ∂R
∂ ˆx
Output: Gradient w.r.t input ∂R
∂x
2: ˆz ← REMOVEREDUNDANCY(ˆz)
3: z ← PADSPECTRUM(ˆz, M × N )
4: z ← RECOVERMAP(z)
5: ∂R

∂x ← F −1 (z)

∂ ˆx

4

Figure 2: Approximations for different pooling schemes, for different factors of dimensionality
reduction. Spectral pooling projects onto the Fourier basis and truncates it as desired. This retains
signiﬁcantly more information and permits the selection of any arbitrary output map dimensionality.

Information preservation

3.1
Spectral pooling can signiﬁcantly increase the amount of retained information relative to max-
pooling in two distinct ways. First, its representation maintains more information for the same
number of degrees of freedom. Spectral pooling reduces the information capacity by tuning the
resolution of the input precisely to match the desired output dimensionality. This operation can also
be viewed as linear low-pass ﬁltering and it exploits the non-uniformity of the spectral density of
the data with respect to frequency. That is, that the power spectra of inputs with spatial structure,
such as natural images, carry most of their mass on lower frequencies. As such, since the amplitudes
of the higher frequencies tend to be small, Parseval’s theorem from Section 2 informs us that their
elimination will result in a representation that minimizes the (cid:96)2 distortion after reconstruction.
Second, spectral pooling does not suffer from the sharp reduction in output dimensionality exhib-
ited by other pooling techniques. More speciﬁcally, for stride-based pooling strategies such as max
pooling, the number of degrees of freedom of two-dimensional inputs is reduced by at least 75% as
a function of stride. In contrast, spectral pooling allows us to specify any arbitrary output dimen-
sionality, and thus allows us to reduce the map size gradually as a function of layer.

3.2 Regularization via resolution corruption
We note that the low-pass ﬁltering radii, say RH and RW , can be chosen to be smaller than the output
map dimensionalities H, W . Namely, while we truncate our input frequency map to size H × W ,
we can further zero-out all frequencies outside the central RH × RW square. While this maintains
the output dimensionality H × W of the input domain after applying the inverse DFT, it effectively
reduces the resolution of the output. This can be seen in Figure 2.
This allows us to introduce regularization in the form of random resolution reduction. We apply this
stochastically by assigning a distribution pR(·) on the frequency truncation radius (for simplicity
we apply the same truncation on both axes), sampling from this a random radius at each iteration,
and wiping out all frequencies outside the square of that size. Note that this can be regarded as an
application of nested dropout (Rippel et al., 2014) on both dimensions of the frequency decompo-
sition of our input. In practice, we have had success choosing pR(·) = U[Hmin,H](·), i.e., a uniform
distribution stretching from some minimum value all the way up to the highest possible resolution.
4 Spectral Parametrization of CNNs
Here we demonstrate how to learn the ﬁlters of CNNs directly in their frequency domain represen-
tations. This offers signiﬁcant advantages over the traditional spatial representation, which we show
empirically in Section 5.
Let us assume that for some layer of our convolutional neural network we seek to learn ﬁlters
of size H × W . To do this, we parametrize each ﬁlter f ∈ CH×W in our network directly in
the frequency domain. To attain its spatial representation, we simply compute its inverse DFT

5

(a) Filters over time.

(b) Sparsity patterns.

(c) Momenta distributions.

Figure 3: Learning dynamics of CNNs with spectral parametrization. The histograms have been
produced after 10 epochs of training on CIFAR-10 by each method, but are similar throughout.
(a) Progression over several epochs of ﬁlters parametrized in the frequency domain. Each pair of
columns corresponds to the spectral parametrization of a ﬁlter and its inverse transform to the spatial
domain. Filter representations tend to be more local in the Fourier basis. (b) Sparsity patterns for the
different parametrizations. Spectral representations tend to be considerably sparser. (c) Distributions
of momenta across parameters for CNNs trained with and without spectral parametrization. In the
spectral parametrization considerably fewer parameters are updated.

as F −1(f ) ∈ RH×W . From this point on, we proceed as we would for any standard CNN by com-
puting the convolution of the ﬁlter with inputs in our mini-batch, and so on.
The back-propagation through the inverse DFT is virtually identical to the one of spectral pooling
described in Section 3. We compute the gradient as outlined in Subsection 2.2, being careful to obey
the conjugate symmetry constraints discussed in Subsection 2.1.
We emphasize that this approach does not change the underlying CNN model in any way — only
the way in which it is parametrized. Hence, this only affects the way the solution space is explored
by the optimization procedure.

4.1 Leveraging ﬁlter structure

This idea exploits the observation that CNN ﬁlters have a very characteristic structure that reappears
across data sets and problem domains. That is, CNN weights can typically be captured with a small
number of degrees of freedom. Represented in the spatial domain, however, this results in signiﬁcant
redundancy.
The frequency domain, on the other hand, provides an appealing basis for ﬁlter representation: char-
acteristic ﬁlters (e.g., Gabor ﬁlters) are often very localized in their spectral representations. This
follows from the observation that ﬁlters tend to feature very speciﬁc length-scales and orientations.
Hence, they tend to have nonzero support in a narrow set of frequency components. This hypothesis
can be observed qualitatively in Figure 3(a) and quantitatively in Figure 3(b).
Empirically, in Section 5 we observe that spectral representations of ﬁlters leads to a convergence
speedup by 2-5 times. We remark that, had we trained our network with standard stochastic gradient
descent, the linearity of differentiation and parameter update would have resulted in exactly the same
ﬁlters regardless of whether they were represented in the spatial or frequency domain during training
(this is true for any invertible linear transformation of the parameter space).
However, as discussed, this parametrization corresponds to a rotation to a more meaningful axis
alignment, where the number of relevant elements has been signiﬁcantly reduced. Since modern
optimizers implement update rules that consist of adaptive element-wise rescaling, they are able to
leverage this axis alignment by making large updates to a small number of elements. This can be
seen quantitatively in Figure 3(c), where the optimizer — Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), in this case
— only touches a small number of elements in its updates.
There exist a number of extensions of the above approach we believe would be quite promising in
future work; we elaborate on these in the discussion.
5 Experiments
We demonstrate the effectiveness of spectral representations in a number of different experiments.
We ran all experiments on code optimized for the Xeon Phi coprocessor. We used Spearmint (Snoek
et al., 2015) for Bayesian optimization of hyperparameters with 5-20 concurrent evaluations.

6

10−410−310−210−1Elementmomentum0.00.20.40.60.81.0NormalizedcountSpatialSpectralMethod
Stochastic pooling
Maxout
Network-in-network
Deeply supervised
Spectral pooling

CIFAR-10 CIFAR-100
41.51%
38.57%
35.68%
34.57%

15.13%
11.68%
10.41%
9.78%

8.6%

31.6%

(a) Approximation loss for the ImageNet validation set.

(b) Classiﬁcation rates.

Figure 4: (a) Average information dissipation for the ImageNet validation set as a function of frac-
tion of parameters kept. This is measured in (cid:96)2 error normalized by the input norm. The red hori-
zontal line indicates the best error rate achievable by max pooling. (b) Test errors on CIFAR-10/100
without data augmentation of the optimal spectral pooling architecture, as compared to current state-
of-the-art approaches: stochastic pooling (Zeiler & Fergus, 2013), Maxout (Goodfellow et al., 2013),
network-in-network (Lin et al., 2013), and deeply-supervised nets (Lee et al., 2014).

5.1 Spectral pooling
Information preservation We test the information retainment properties of spectral pooling on
the validation set of ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015). For the different pooling strategies we plot
the average approximation loss resulting from pooling to different dimensionalities. This can be seen
in Figure 4. We observe the two aspects discussed in Subsection 3.1: ﬁrst, spectral pooling permits
signiﬁcantly better reconstruction for the same number of parameters. Second, for max pooling,
the only knob controlling the coarseness of approximation is the stride, which results in severe
quantization and a constraining lower bound on preserved information (marked in the ﬁgure as a
horizontal red line). In contrast, spectral pooling permits the selection of any output dimensionality,
thereby producing a smooth curve over all frequency truncation choices.
Classiﬁcation with convolutional neural networks We test spectral pooling on different classi-
ﬁcation tasks. We hyperparametrize and optimize the following CNN architecture:

(cid:0)C96+32m

3×3

→ SP↓(cid:98)γHm(cid:99)×(cid:98)γHm(cid:99)(cid:1)M

m=1 → C96+32M

1×1

→ C10/100

1×1 → GA → Softmax
(5)

Here, by CF
S we denote a convolutional layer with F ﬁlters each of size S, by SP↓S a spectral
pooling layer with output dimensionality S, and GA the global averaging layer described in Lin
et al. (2013). We upper-bound the number of ﬁlters per layer as 288. Every convolution and pooling
layer is followed by a ReLU nonlinearity. We let Hm be the height of the map of layer m. Hence,
each spectral pooling layer reduces each output map dimension by factor γ ∈ (0, 1). We assign
frequency dropout distribution pR(·; m, α, β) = U[(cid:98)cmHm(cid:99),Hm](·) for layer m, total layers M and
M (β − α) for some constants α, β ∈ R. This parametrization can be thought
with cm(α, β) = α + m
of as some linear parametrization of the dropout rate as a function of the layer.
We perform hyperparameter optimization on the dimensionality decay rate γ ∈ [0.25, 0.85], number
of layers M ∈ {1, . . . , 15}, resolution randomization hyperparameters α, β ∈ [0, 0.8], weight decay
rate in [10−5, 10−2], momentum in [1 − 0.10.5, 1 − 0.12] and initial learning rate in [0.14, 0.1]. We
train each model for 150 epochs and anneal the learning rate by a factor of 10 at epochs 100 and 140.
We intentionally use no dropout nor data augmentation, as these introduce a number of additional
hyperparameters which we want to disambiguate as alternative factors for success.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the optimal hyperparameter conﬁguration assigns the slowest possible
layer map decay rate γ = 0.85.
It selects randomized resolution reduction constants of about
α ≈ 0.30, β ≈ 0.15, momentum of about 0.95 and initial learning rate 0.0088. These settings al-
low us to attain classiﬁcation rates of 8.6% on CIFAR-10 and 31.6% on CIFAR-100. These are
competitive results among approaches that do not employ data augmentation: a comparison to state-
of-the-art approaches from the literature can be found in Table 4(b).
5.2 Spectral parametrization of CNNs
We demonstrate the effectiveness of spectral parametrization on a number of CNN optimization
tasks, for different architectures and for different ﬁlter sizes. We use the notation MPT
S to denote a
max pooling layer with size S and stride T , and FCF is a fully-connected layer with F ﬁlters.

7

0.00.20.40.60.8Fractionofparameterskept2−72−62−52−42−32−22−120kf−ˆfkkfkMaxpoolingSpectralpoolingArchitecture

Deep (7)
Deep (7)
Generic (6)
Generic (6)
Sp. Pooling (5)
Sp. Pooling (5)

Filter
size
3 × 3
5 × 5
3 × 3
5 × 5
3 × 3
5 × 5

Speedup
factor

2.2
4.8
2.2
5.1
2.4
4.8

(b) Speedup factors.

(a) Training curves.

Figure 5: Optimization of CNNs via spectral parametrization. All experiments include data aug-
(a) Training curves for the various experiments. The remainder of the optimization
mentation.
past the matching point is marked in light blue. The red diamonds indicate the relative epochs in
which the asymptotic error rate of the spatial approach is achieved. (b) Speedup factors for different
architectures and ﬁlter sizes. A non-negligible speedup is observed even for tiny 3 × 3 ﬁlters.
The ﬁrst architecture is the generic one used in a variety of deep learning papers, such as Krizhevsky
et al. (2012); Snoek et al. (2012); Krizhevsky (2009); Kingma & Ba (2015):

C96
3×3 → MP2

3×3 → C192

3×3 → MP2

3×3 → FC1024 → FC512 → Softmax

(6)

The second architecture we consider is the one employed in Snoek et al. (2015), which was shown
to attain competitive classiﬁcation rates. It is deeper and more complex:
1×1 → C

1×1 → GA → Softmax

3×3 → MP

3×3 → MP

3×3 → C

192

3×3 → C

192

3×3 → C

2

3×3 → C

2

3×3 → C

(7)

192

10/100

96

C

96

192

The third architecture considered is the spectral pooling network from Equation 5. To increase
the difﬁculty of optimization and reﬂect real training conditions, we supplemented all networks with
data augmentation in the form of translations, horizontal reﬂections, HSV perturbations and dropout.
We initialized both spatial and spectral ﬁlters in the spatial domain as the same values; for the
spectral parametrization experiments we then computed the Fourier transform of these to attain their
frequency representations. We optimized all networks using the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) update
rule, a variant of RMSprop that we ﬁnd to be a fast and robust optimizer.
The training curves can be found in Figure 5(a) and the respective factors of convergence speedup
in Table 5. Surprisingly, we observe non-negligible speedup even for tiny ﬁlters of size 3× 3, where
we did not expect the frequency representation to have much room to exploit spatial structure.
6 Discussion and remaining open problems
In this work, we demonstrated that spectral representations provide a rich spectrum of applications.
We introduced spectral pooling, which allows pooling to any desired output dimensionality while
retaining signiﬁcantly more information than other pooling approaches. In addition, we showed that
the Fourier functions provide a suitable basis for ﬁlter parametrization, as demonstrated by faster
convergence of the optimization procedure.
One possible future line of work is to embed the network in its entirety in the frequency domain.
In models that employ Fourier transforms to compute convolutions, at every convolutional layer the
input is FFT-ed and the elementwise multiplication output is then inverse FFT-ed. These back-and-
forth transformations are very computationally intensive, and as such it would be desirable to strictly
remain in the frequency domain. However, the reason for these repeated transformations is the
application of nonlinearities in the forward domain: if one were to propose a sensible nonlinearity
in the frequency domain, this would spare us from the incessant domain switching.

Acknowledgements We would like to thank Prabhat, Michael Gelbart and Matthew Johnson for
useful discussions and assistance throughout this project. Jasper Snoek was a fellow in the Harvard
Center for Research on Computation and Society. This work is supported by the Applied Mathe-
matics Program within the Ofﬁce of Science Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Research of the U.S.
Department of Energy under contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. This work used resources of the
National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center (NERSC). We thank Helen He and Doug
Jacobsen for providing us with access to the Babbage Xeon-Phi testbed at NERSC.

8

e−2e−1e0e1Size5e−1e0e1e−2e−1e0e1SpatialSpectral04080120160200Deepe−2e−1e0e1Size304080120160200Generice−1e0e10306090120150Sp.Poolinge−2e−1e0e1References
Bengio, Yoshua and LeCun, Yann. Scaling learning algorithms towards AI. In Bottou, L´eon, Chapelle, Olivier,

DeCoste, D., and Weston, J. (eds.), Large Scale Kernel Machines. MIT Press, 2007.

Goodfellow, Ian J., Warde-Farley, David, Mirza, Mehdi, Courville, Aaron C., and Bengio, Yoshua. Maxout net-
works. CoRR, abs/1302.4389, 2013. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/corr/
corr1302.html#abs-1302-4389.

Hinton, Geoffrey. What’s wrong with convolutional nets? MIT Brain and Cognitive Sciences - Fall
Colloquium Series, Dec 2014a. URL http://techtv.mit.edu/collections/bcs/videos/
30698-what-s-wrong-with-convolutional-nets.

Hinton, Geoffrey. Ask me anything: Geoffrey hinton. Reddit Machine Learning, 2014b. URL https:
//www.reddit.com/r/MachineLearning/comments/2lmo0l/ama_geoffrey_hinton/.
Ioffe, Sergey and Szegedy, Christian. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
internal covariate shift. CoRR, abs/1502.03167, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167.
Karpathy, Andrej, Toderici, George, Shetty, Sanketh, Leung, Thomas, Sukthankar, Rahul, and Fei-Fei, Li.
Large-scale video classiﬁcation with convolutional neural networks. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, 2014.

Kingma, Diederik and Ba, Jimmy. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR, abs/1412.6980, 2015.

URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.

Krizhevsky, Alex. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.
Krizhevsky, Alex., Sutskever, Ilya, and Hinton, Geoffrey E. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional

neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.

LeCun, Yann, Boser, Bernhard, Denker, J. S., Henderson, D., Howard, R. E., Hubbard, W., and Jackel., L. D.
Handwritten digit recognition with a back-propagation network. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 1989.

Lee, Chen-Yu, Xie, Saining, Gallagher, Patrick, Zhang, Zhengyou, and Tu, Zhuowen. Deeply-supervised nets.

CoRR, abs/1409.5185, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.5185.

Lin, Min, Chen, Qiang, and Yan, Shuicheng. Network in network. CoRR, abs/1312.4400, 2013. URL http:

//dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/corr/corr1312.html#LinCY13.

Mathieu, Micha¨el, Henaff, Mikael, and LeCun, Yann. Fast training of convolutional networks through FFTs.

CoRR, abs/1312.5851, 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5851.

Rippel, Oren, Gelbart, Michael A., and Adams, Ryan P. Learning ordered representations with nested dropout.

In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014.

Russakovsky, Olga, Deng, Jia, Su, Hao, Krause, Jonathan, Satheesh, Sanjeev, Ma, Sean, Huang, Zhiheng,
Karpathy, Andrej, Khosla, Aditya, Bernstein, Michael, Berg, Alexander C., and Li, Fei-Fei.
ImageNet
Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision, 2015. doi: 10.1007/
s11263-015-0816-y.

Snoek, Jasper, Larochelle, Hugo, and Adams, Ryan Prescott. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine

learning algorithms. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.

Snoek, Jasper, Rippel, Oren, Swersky, Kevin, Kiros, Ryan, Satish, Nadathur, Sundaram, Narayanan, Patwary,
Md. Mostofa Ali, Prabhat, and Adams, Ryan P. Scalable Bayesian optimization using deep neural networks.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.

Torralba, Antonio and Oliva, Aude. Statistics of natural image categories. Network, 14(3):391–412, August

2003. ISSN 0954-898X.

Vasilache, Nicolas, Johnson, Jeff, Mathieu, Micha¨el, Chintala, Soumith, Piantino, Serkan, and LeCun, Yann.
Fast convolutional nets with fbfft: A GPU performance evaluation. CoRR, abs/1412.7580, 2014. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.7580.

Zeiler, Matthew D. and Fergus, Rob. Stochastic pooling for regularization of deep convolutional neural net-
works. CoRR, abs/1301.3557, 2013. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/corr/
corr1301.html#abs-1301-3557.

9

